Book II [What Christians Believe]

The Rival Conceptions of God (ch. 1)

1) The divisions of humanity
    a. A majority of humans believe in a god or gods, the minority do not.
    b. Pantheists believe god is beyond good and evil, others believe in a good/righteous god.
    c. Christians believe in a god who is good/righteous, and who created the world.

2) If a good god made the world, why is the world cruel and unjust?
    a. Where does the concept of injustice come from?
    b. If we have a concept of injustice it must be that there is a standard of justice

The Invasion (ch. 2)

3) The universe is obviously bad and apparently meaningless, but we are conscious that it is bad and meaningless. How is this explained?
    a. Christians say the universe is good and has gone wrong.
    b. Dualists believe two equal, independent powers (good and evil) are at war.
    c. Why does one call one power 'good' and the other 'evil'?
    d. Whichever being created the standard whereby one power is called 'good' and the other 'evil' is behind both powers, and is the real God.

4) Evil is the corruption of good by pursuing it by the wrong method, in the wrong way, or too much.
    a. Christianity agrees with dualism that the universe is at war between good and evil, but we believe the evil dark power was created by God.
    b. The devil is a fallen angel, created as good, but corrupted.

The Shocking Alternative (ch. 3)

5) How can evil exist against the will of an omnipotent, omnibenevolent being?
    a. God wills for free-willed beings because free will is valuable to him.
    b. The cleverer God creates a being to be, the greater evil (and good) it is capable of.

6) Our sinful desires are attempts to replace God.
    a. The existence of a 'self' enables one to put oneself first, which was Satan's (and man's) sin.
    b. We were created to be satisfied in God alone; God cannot give us happiness and peace apart from Himself because it does not exist.

7) God has revealed himself to man in several ways over time.
    a. Conscience: our innate sense of right and wrong.
    b. "Good dreams": stories of resurrection giving new life to men.
    c. Jews as God's chosen people and the Old Testament account.

8) Jesus arrived out of the Jewish nation with shocking claims.
    a. He claimed to forgive sins against others.
    b. He claimed to be God.
    c. Because of these claims, Jesus cannot be simply a good moral teacher, he must be one of the following:
        i)   the Son of God
        ii)  a lunatic
        iii) a liar
        iv)  the devil of hell

The Perfect Penitent (ch. 4)

9) Why did Christ, the Son of God come to earth?
    a. Obviously for teaching.
    b. Christians believe Christ's death and resurrection are more central to his purpose than his teaching.
    c. Christ's death washed away our sins, and by dying he disabled death.

10) Why did Christ have to die? Couldn't God have simply pardoned the human race without requiring a sacrifice?
    a. If you view justice as a punishment for sin this would be possible.
    b. But if you view justice as payment of a debt, someone else would be needed to foot the bill.

11) Man "is not an imperfect creature who needs improvement: he is a rebel who must lay down his arms." (56)
    a. Laying down arms (repentance) is the only way to begin reconciliation with God.
    b. Repentance requires killing the old self-will, and can only be undertaken by a good man.
    c. Bad men require God's help to surrender/die, but God in his nature never surrenders or dies.
    d. God became man, surrendered his will, and experienced death so that he could help us to do these things.

The Practical Conclusion (ch. 5)

12) The next step in the evolution of man is the transformation from human to Christ-like.
    a. Baptism, belief, and communion help to spread the Christ-life to us.
    b. They are strange practices, but that is to be expected.

13) The majority of things we believe are believed not through abstract reasoning, but through trusted authorities (science, history, etc).

14) The Christ-life impacts the way we live, but in an unexpected way.
    a. We did not make our own Christ-life.
    b. We must maintain our Christ-life by copying Christ.
    c. The Christ-life heals itself by creating a predisposition toward repentance.
    d. The Christ-life believes that God is making us good because he loves us, not loving us because we are good.

15) Christians believe Christ is actually operating through them like we are his fingers and muscles.
    a. This explains why the Christ-life is spread through physical acts (e.g. baptism, communion).
    b. God "likes matter; he created it". (64)

16) Is it not unfair that God only grants new life to people who have heard of Christ and been enabled to believe in Him?
    a. We know that no man can be saved except through Christ.
    b. We do not know that only those who KNOW him can be saved through Him.

17 Why is God not landing in force, overtaking evil?
    a. Christians believe he will land in force and overtake evil in the future.
    b. He wants to give us the chance to join Him freely.
    c. When he does land in force it will be the end of the world; there will be no denying that he is God.
    d. "There is no use saying you choose to lie down when it has become impossible to stand up." (65)
